At 42 million...
The art world, where paintings
change hands for fortunes.
Sold. Thank you very much.
But for every known masterpiece
there may be another still waiting
to be discovered.
This is it.
International art dealer Philip
Mould and I
have teamed up to hunt for
lost works by great artists.
We use old-fashioned detective work
and state-of-the-art science
to get to the truth.
Science can enable us to see beyond
the human eye.
Da-da! Oh, wow!
Every case is packed with surprise
and intrigue.
Is it or isn't it a Freud, then?
But not every painting is quite what
it seems.
It's a journey that can end in
joy...
This is definitely by
Paul Delaroche.
..or bitter disappointment.
I can't cope with this
roller-coaster.
What a nightmare!
In this episode we're on the trail
of two pictures believed to be by
one of the world's most
sought-after artists -
Paul Gauguin.
We could be dealing with something
of extraordinary significance as
artworks by this most innovative, if
controversial, 19th-century artist,
they should be worth hundreds of
thousands of pounds.
But the authenticity of both
pictures has been thrown into doubt.
They no longer believed it was a
Gauguin,
almost as sweet and as short as
that.
Can we find new evidence to show
that these enchanting pictures
deserve a second chance?
It's like it's coming into focus.
It's a journey that takes us to
Brittany and Bilbao and back to
the uncertainty and danger of
the Second World War.
It makes me shiver,
it really does.
At stake, two significant prizes -
a rare still life...
..and what may be the very first
study for a Gauguin masterpiece,
one of the most expensive paintings
ever sold.
There are collectors out there who
would really want this.
Two chances of redemption, but is
either picture the real deal?
I'm really nervous.
London, home to some of the world's
greatest art collections.
For art detectives on the hunt for a
lost masterpiece, there is no better
training than getting up close
and personal with the greats.
And if there were a world ranking of
artists,
one name would be near the top.
So here is Gauguin.
And when I think of Gauguin, this is
exactly what comes to mind.
Gauguin is one of those artists
that gets the blood boiling for
collectors and curators across
the world.
Gauguin. Tahitian Gauguin, from
1896.
I shall bring the hammer down at
£7,300,000.
Born in Paris in 1848, Paul Gauguin
worked as a stockbroker,
just painting in his spare time.
Yet, by the early 1880s,
his work was being exhibited
alongside the Impressionists.
He would eventually abandon his
family
to pursue the life of a
bohemian artist.
Self-centred and impulsive,
a hedonist who sunk to the depths
of depravity.
Famed for his bold experimentation
with colour,
Gauguin is best remembered for his
scenes of native life in Tahiti,
which he first visited in 1891.
He died, penniless and
disease-ridden,
in his tropical paradise in 1903.
Even though he struggled for money
throughout his artistic career,
one of Gauguin's Tahitian paintings,
back in 2015,
sold for what is thought to be
200 million,
making it one of the most expensive
paintings ever sold.
And frankly one can see why.
Demand for Gauguin's work has never
been higher
and we have been contacted
by two viewers who each think
they're in possession
of something special.
I've always wanted a Gauguin on
Fake Or Fortune?,
but it's always the way,
you wait ages for one and then two
come along at the same time.
I'm following up the first of
our leads
about a possible Gauguin
discovery
in suburban Manchester.
It might be a far cry from Tahiti,
but the picture I've received via
e-mail
has enough promise to brighten
the morning of any art dealer.
So I've arranged to meet the owner
of this tantalising little sketch,
NHS nutritionist Steffi Price.
Hello. How very nice to meet you.
Thank you for having us.
So this is the picture I wanted you
to have a look at.
Here it is.
This has got impact.
There's a feeling of power here.
It's lovely, isn't it?
VOICEOVER: On first glance,
Steffi's picture appears to be a
sketch in pencil and charcoal of
a Tahitian woman, perhaps a relic
from the artist's time in
the Pacific...
If it's genuine, that is.
So what's the story here,
where did it come from?
So it came from my grandfather,
who was called Alfred Scharf.
He was an art historian and
an art dealer as well.
He originally came from Germany
in the early '30s.
So is this him? Yes, this is a photo
of him, which I love,
I think that sums him up.
Steffi's grandfather,
Dr Alfred Scharf,
was born in 1900 and worked as
a curator in Berlin.
When his Jewish origins brought him
to the attention of the Nazi regime,
he fled to Britain in 1933
with his wife and daughter,
where he continued his career as
an art historian.
He is every inch the connoisseur,
isn't he?
He is, isn't he? The light falling
on both of them like that.
A bookish connoisseur in the 1940s
with a good eye.
You might expect a drawing like
this therefore...
To be genuine. ..to have a good
chance of being authentic.
Yes. So where, as far as you know,
did he get the drawing from?
I don't know. I'm assuming he got it
at auction in London,
I think that's most likely.
Right, so it says here, written by
your grandmother,
"bought by Dr Scharf..." -
your grandfather, Alfred -
"..June 10th 1948."
So that's pretty definite.
That sounds like a sale, doesn't it?
I think so.
Have you tried to authenticate it
yourself?
I took this to one of the leading
auction houses in London,
who were
initially very excited about it.
But then they showed it to one of
their experts,
who felt it could be a forgery.
Yes, so when a leading auction house
says...
it's probably a fake and return
it to you,
that's normally the end of the road.
I know, but I suppose that's why we
have approached you because I'm not
convinced that is the truth either.
If we could prove this is by
Gauguin,
it would be a serious drawing.
There's no doubt about it,
there are collectors out there who
would really want this.
They would fight to own it.
I can see this being worth up to
£200,000.
Oh, goodness! It's a lot more than
I thought.
But...
We've got a struggle.
If we could prove it,
what would you do,
would you sell it?
I might do. It would be nice to be
able to pay off the mortgage.
It appears that we could be dealing
with something of extraordinary
significance, a drawing by
Paul Gauguin,
one of the towering figures of
late 19th-century French art,
and not only that, but from an
extremely pivotal, important moment
in his life, 1891, 1892,
when he went out to Tahiti to
find new inspiration,
new artistic ideas.
While he was in Tahiti, Gauguin
filled many sketchbooks with
drawings.
He called these studies of
indigenous life his "secrets",
but they provided the building
blocks for his most ambitious
oil paintings,
such as When Will You Marry?
The portrait of two native women
sold privately
for over 200 million.
If Steffi's simple drawing came
from one of these sketchbooks,
could it be one of Gauguin's very
first preparatory works for
this landmark painting?
While Philip takes Steffi's sketch
back to London for further research,
I'm on my way to Cambridgeshire to
follow up our second lead about
a possible still life by
Paul Gauguin.
I've arranged to meet architect
James Snell to find out more.
Hello. Hello.
Welcome. Nice to meet you.
Nice to meet you.
I've come to see your painting.
Well... Yes, I hope so.
So here we are.
Still life with...six peaches or
oranges, I can't quite tell.
It used to be Six Oranges, but
then, later on,
we believed it might have been
called Six Peaches.
The bowl behind, this is a table
here...
Lovely warm colours, aren't they?
Yes, super.
And, now, this is intriguing.
"Au Seigner Roy",
or "Hoi", as they would say in
French.
And then, what's this, PG? PG.
We hope for Paul Gauguin?
We do indeed.
How did this painting come into
your family?
It was given to my parents by
Dick Rykens,
who lived further down the
lane from my parents' house.
Dick was a close friend of the
family
and I have a picture here, you can
see him standing
in front of the house
down the lane that he
was just doing up.
There he is, there is Dick,
there is my mother and my father,
and he had inherited it from his
father, Sir Paul Rykens.
Sir Paul Rykens was a Dutch
businessman
who in 1930 had presided
over the merger
of two companies to create
the multinational giant Unilever.
As the founding chairman of
the firm,
he could afford to shop for
the finest art.
Someone like Sir Paul Rykens, one
assumes, would only have bought
from the very top,
most reputable dealers.
I would have thought so, yes.
And there is a sticker on the back.
OK. So what have we got here?
Huink and...
Oh, my gosh. Huink and Scherjon,
which sold the painting to Sir Paul
Rykens in 1936, I think it was.
So it's there, "Paul Gauguin,
Orange."
Orange. And it's complete as well.
Once you'd inherited this picture,
what did you do with it?
We took it to a London auction house
to see whether they would be able to
sell it for us
and, indeed, they got very excited
and wrote us a letter.
And the letter, this was back in
2011...
..explaining that they would want to
put it as their centrepiece
of their auction for the June
auction.
Oh, my goodness, "I am writing to
confirm that we would be honoured
"to present Gauguin's Six
Peches..." - so Six Peaches.
"It is a beautiful example of the
artist's work and its appearance on
"the market is likely to be greeted
with much enthusiasm.
"We recommend an auction estimate of
£200,000-300,000."
They loved this painting.
Yes, it's amazing, isn't it?
So why are we here? What went wrong?
Well, four weeks before the auction,
I got a call telling me that they
were pulling it because they no
longer believed it was a Gauguin -
almost as sweet and as short
as that.
The auction house revealed that they
had consulted with a Gauguin expert,
who told them she did not
recognise the hand of the artist
in James's painting.
And how did you feel about that?
Well, a bit of a blow,
especially after the initial
enthusiasm was so great.
I mean, it's a sucker punch,
isn't it?
It is, yes. When you get a letter
like this,
where they are falling over
themselves
to sell your picture and then they
say, "Oh, sorry." Yes.
Goodness. So it's been a bit of a
roller-coaster with your picture?
Yes, yes, it has.
Back in London, I've been doing some
research into Steffi's sketch of
the Tahitian woman and I've made a
perplexing discovery
in a book about Gauguin's art.
I've been trying to work out why
the auction house wouldn't
accept it and it seems reasonably
straightforward.
Steffi's drawing appears to be
almost exactly replicated in a book
published in 1958, ten years after
Steffi's grandfather bought it.
It shows the same image,
but around it
are other drawings, doodles,
sketches.
So is Steffi's sketch just a copy of
the central figure in the book,
as the auction house seem to be
suggesting?
Or is it the original image,
drawn by Gauguin himself?
And if that's the case, what
happened to the rest of it?
We've got to explain why it's
smaller.
Could it be that it's been folded
over behind?
Could there have been some
jiggery-pokery in the past
that we might be able to prove?
There are two exhibition labels on
the back that will need further
scrutiny, but I'm eager to get to
the sketch itself.
Let's see if I can actually get it
out by removing
the tape along the edges.
Can't really get to grips with the
drawing until you take it out from
behind its glass.
Ah, now, that's interesting.
Looks as though it is drawn in
something like charcoal or pencil,
but a mechanical copy it is not.
But it's also much clearer now that
there's a sense of this being part
something larger, something bigger.
And, actually, when you hold up to
the light,
what's also become very evident is
that it has had quite a brutal past
as well.
There's a great big tear mark,
as though someone has taken a bite
out of it -
but then replaced the paper.
I think that's pretty clear.
This drawing has been cut down.
And the reason that the auction
house did not accept it
is because this drawing is published
in a book in 1958.
Steffi's grandfather bought it ten
years earlier
and it was a different shape.
It was smaller,
how do you explain that?
Two pictures attributed to
Paul Gauguin,
both rejected by auction houses.
Can we find any new evidence to show
that they deserve a second hearing?
It's a tall order. Gauguin's work
has frequently been forged,
particularly in the years after
his death
as his reputation began to grow.
We've recruited Professor
Anthea Callen,
one of the world's leading experts
in 19th-century French art,
to assist with our research.
She has been trawling through
archives and inventories
of Gauguin's work in search of
fresh leads.
Anthea, we've got two pictures
up here.
Can we start by talking about the
oil first of all?
What have you found out about that?
The still life,
we do in fact have a reproduction of
it in the 1964 catalogue raisonne.
So the authorised list of
Gauguin's works.
The problem for us is that right
from the start this catalogue was
considered problematic.
There are known to be works that
are fake.
Certainly inauthentic.
There are characteristics about this
picture that seem to sort of scream
Gauguin, particularly the strong
circumference lines
for those pieces of fruit,
but there are other bits that
worry me.
James has had this painting
scientifically examined
and he knows that the
pigments are from the right period
for Gauguin, so that much we do
know.
Yeah, and that's what is so
reassuring about this painting
when you look into it.
It bears all the scars and
the bruises of its age.
It definitely feels old.
What's also really interesting about
this work is that it actually has
a dedication,
not just a signature, the PG.
It also has "Au Seigner Roy".
When I saw that name on James's
painting, I did a bit of research
and I thought that was rather
encouraging because
Seigner Roy is Louis Roy,
who was a friend of Gauguin,
a fellow artist.
Here we have him.
This is supposed to be a portrait of
Louis Roy by Gauguin
from 1889,
when they were in fact exhibiting
together in a show in Paris.
He certainly collected Gauguin
paintings,
including six that he then sold on
to the dealer Ambroise Vollard
in 1904.
Well, the provenance for the oil
painting is pretty strong, actually.
If we turn the picture around, have
a look at the back,
there's a label on there which
appears to relate to a sale in 1936,
when, as far as James
understands it,
the painting was sold to none other
than the founder of Unilever,
Sir Paul Rykens.
Well, 1936.
I think we can take it back even a
bit further
because we have discovered a sale
catalogue of 1930 in Paris
where James's
painting is reproduced.
That's unquestionably our picture -
it's one and the same -
and what a gift.
I mean, the idea of it being
photographed in a sale in 1930,
how often does that happen?
So that's real progress for our
oil painting.
Let's look at the sketch.
I mean, look at that, doesn't it
have cracking presence?
Isn't it beautiful?
But look at the back!
Two exhibition labels on the back of
the picture provide a title for
the sketch, "Femme accroupie",
or Crouching Woman,
and a number of tantalising leads.
Paul Gauguin, exhibition of works
at...the Leicester Galleries.
Very well-known galleries of the
period
in Leicester Square in London.
The man who bought this picture was
Lord Ivor Churchill,
a very wealthy man, a cousin of
Winston Churchill.
And Steffi says her grandfather
bought it from Lord Ivor Churchill.
And what have we here?
Look at that, not one but
there appears now two exhibitions.
Kunsthalle, Basel, in Switzerland,
in 1928!
Is it too good to be true? It is, of
course, possible to fake labels,
just as it's possible to fake art.
But you've got to keep in mind that
this drawing was turned down by
the auction house.
Effectively, they say it's a fake.
Do they know something that we
don't?
Steffi, who got it from her
grandfather,
says that her grandfather was
a dealer.
Perhaps he was taken in.
The more we find out about him,
the closer we might get to
an answer.
I want to know if Steffi's
grandfather
was the kind of man who knew
a genuine Gauguin when he saw one
and my research has led us to the
Imperial War Museum in London.
It's clear that Dr Alfred Scharf
was a highly respected art historian
with an impressive track record in
discovering lost masterpieces,
such as this 15th-century
Dutch triptych.
But the esteem in which Dr Scharf
was held
is most strikingly revealed
in a sinister wartime document that
curator Simon Offard
has found for us.
When the Germans were preparing to
invade Great Britain,
the SS general drew up this list.
It's called the
Sonderfahndungsliste,
which literally means
special wanted list.
It's a list of 2,820 people that
the Nazis wanted taken into
custody as soon as the UK was
invaded.
Now, a lot of people on this list
were there because they were famous
politicians, so Churchill, Eden,
Attlee, Chamberlain,
and included authors,
writers, poets,
people like HG Wells
and JB Priestley.
I can see where this is going now.
And included, in this list,
page 191...
..Dr Alfred Scharf.
His name, date of birth.
He's down as an assistant and
living in London.
It's horrible. I find it really
upsetting, actually.
I mean, I had no idea a list like
that existed.
I mean, it's a hit list, basically,
isn't it?
I'm quite shocked to see his name
there.
I had no idea he would've been seen
as a threat in that way.
We know Hitler, Himmler and Goering
all had huge art collections,
which were stolen, taken from
individuals.
Your grandfather's knowledge of
hidden works of art
could have proved useful.
It makes me shiver,
it really does.
The Nazis did not like the fact
that they'd lost him.
They wanted to get him.
Alfred Scharf is really a man I can
identify with.
I mean, he hunted down pictures
for a living.
He really cared about attribution
and, in a curious sort of way,
the fact that the Nazis wanted him
is a tribute to his status.
And I am beginning to feel that
this is so much more than
just about Gauguin.
It's about restoring the reputation
of a man who has effectively
been accused of buying a fake.
This is about Alfred, it's also
about Steffi and her family.
We want to put the record straight.
While Philip continues his research
into Steffi's sketch,
I've been digging deeper into
the origins
of the still life owned by
James Snell.
When it was listed as a genuine work
in the 1964 catalogue of Gauguin's
pictures, it was described as being
painted in 1889,
when Gauguin was in Brittany.
A time when he and many others were
trying to find their own style.
I've been doing some research
and it's clear, not just from this
article,
but from quite a few others, that
paintings from this period that were
once thought to be by Gauguin are
no longer believed to be so.
And the difficulty with
authenticating Gauguin is that he,
as he developed as an artist,
appropriated styles from
other artists,
the Impressionists in particular,
Cezanne, he greatly admired.
And then, the artists that admired
Gauguin, in turn, copied him.
And so, you know,
it's all pretty confused.
I want to find out more about the
work Gauguin was doing in the late
1880s, so owner James and I
are following in his footsteps to
Brittany.
Gauguin was drawn to this wild and
primitive part of northern France
and settled in Pont-Aven in 1886,
quickly establishing himself in
the town's small colony of artists.
It was here that Gauguin developed
a more bold and distinctive style,
thanks in part to his friendship
with fellow artist Emile Bernard.
I'm keen to know whether James's
painting fits the pattern of
Gauguin's work from this period,
so we've arranged to meet
Lionel Jacques
in the Museum of Fine Arts
in Quimper.
Lionel, when Gauguin came to
Pont-Aven,
it was already an established
artist colony,
but he did meet someone who turned
out to be rather important,
who was a young artist called
Emile Bernard.
Yes. He was only 18 at the time.
How important was he in relation to
Gauguin
and their influence upon
each other?
So Emile Bernard met Gauguin for
the first time in 1886 in Pont-Aven,
but the important moment is two
years later,
when both painters
come back to Pont-Aven
and Emile Bernard will bring a new
technique called cloisonnism.
It is this way of painting large
surfaces of one colour,
surrounded by a dark line.
A bit like stained-glass.
Stained-glass windows.
Exactly. Blocks of colour.
This technique of cloisonnism,
with its bold lines and flat blocks
of colour,
is much in evidence in the museum,
which holds work by many artists who
adopted the style.
And it seems to be echoed in
James's painting.
It is the perspective that I've...
It's almost troubled me,
of the painting,
because it doesn't look very real.
The fruit is flat and the fruit is
sat right on the edge of the table,
which realistically might not really
have been like that.
But it is because it made this
slightly strange composition,
which I think is quite interesting.
James's painting has all the
qualities of the cloisonnism style
Gauguin adopted in Brittany.
But like all new ideas,
it was quick to catch on and
much imitated.
In 1889, when James's picture may
have been painted,
Gauguin was living in the little
seaside hamlet of Le Pouldu.
He was here for 17 months,
staying with two other artists in
a cramped hotel.
The interior has been recreated for
visitors keen to experience the life
of a late 19th-century artist.
And my research into this bohemian
group has thrown up some concerns
I want to share with James.
James, I wanted to bring you here
because I think this is where we can
really feel what it was like for
Gauguin and his fellow painters when
they all got together here in
Brittany,
and they were painting and exploring
and finding new ideas.
And if you think about it,
when they were in here,
when the weather was inclement,
like it is today,
they would come indoors and paint
still lives.
Yeah. I mean, basically it means
that it is going to be something
that was very similar in their work,
if they were painting the same scene
with the same light and indeed
cross-fertilisation of ideas.
Exactly. Which is why I wanted to
show you this.
This is a painting by Gauguin and
we've done a little sort of
approximation of it with the onions
and the apples and the ceramic
vessel there.
So that is by Gauguin.
And that is by de Haan,
Meijer de Haan,
the Dutch artist who was here and a
great friend of Gauguin's.
Of the same...
Of exactly the same...
Yeah. The bread, the onions.
Wow. Just painted from a different
angle, differently.
Very slightly different.
With a number of artists painting
the exact same subject
in a very similar style,
telling them apart
can be fraught with difficulty.
How can we be sure a picture is by
Gauguin and not by one of his
followers, such as the painter
Charles Laval?
I've been doing a bit of research
into the artists who came here
and gathered around Gauguin,
trying to follow in the wake of
the master,
and some troubling things have
emerged.
So take an artist called
Charles Laval, for example,
he ended up travelling with Gauguin
to Martinique at one stage.
The catalogue raisonne,
the authorised list of Gauguin's
works that was produced in 1964,
24 of the works in there which
were attributed to Gauguin
have emerged to be by Charles Laval.
You've got a chap called
Emile Bernard,
a great admirer of Gauguin's.
To his horror, he found out by going
to an auction that one of his own
works had been passed off as
a Gauguin and someone had stuck
a Gauguin signature on the bottom
of it.
And then there was a number of
paintings by his mates here
at Le Pouldu and also at Pont-Aven
and then, later on, their
paintings got thoroughly mixed up.
Who these days has heard of Emile
Bernard, Charles Laval?
Very few people.
Well, compared to Gauguin.
Compared to Gauguin - his name,
he is a global phenomenon.
Yeah. It's a rather intriguing
situation, though,
that these fellow artists of Gauguin
have ended up producing fakes.
Yeah. Either because people have
later on taken their pictures and
put Gauguin on the bottom.
To raise its value.
To raise the value. Or, perhaps,
and there are some question marks
only over one or two of them,
that they put Gauguin on there
themselves.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah.
We shall see. So this great
fraternity of artists
may have actually led to something
slightly darker.
Yes. I can see that.
Our visit to Brittany might have
helped us understand the way James's
painting looks, but it has thrown up
new doubts
about just who painted it.
I am slightly confused.
The fact that paintings are...one
day they can be authenticated to be
by a particular artist
and the next day not.
That's what I find most frustrating.
I'm still remaining incredibly
open-minded
about the future of our painting.
We haven't allowed ourselves
the luxury to think that it could be
anything but the painting
we have at the moment.
Back in London, I have been doing
further research on
our other Gauguin contender,
Steffi's sketch.
One of the labels on the back of the
picture shows that it was exhibited
and sold in 1931 at the
Leicester Galleries in London.
Founded in 1902 by
Cecil and Wilfred Phillips,
the Galleries specialised in French
and British art
until its closure in 1977.
Its archives are still maintained by
Cecil's grandson, Christopher,
and he has agreed to search for any
record of Steffi's sketch in
the company's ledgers.
Hi, Christopher.
Have you managed to locate the
specific ledger
that relates to this period of
the Leicester Galleries' activity?
Yes, I found the ledger and we must
see if it corresponds to the label
on it. Gosh, they are wonderful,
these books, aren't they?
I mean, they are all on computer
these days.
Here's the...entry.
This is very clear.
It is headed up Paul Gauguin,
so this is obviously sales
relating to him.
There is a list of the purchasers,
and, casting my eye down,
Lord Sandwich bought one.
Someone called Jameson,
someone called Pollock.
Here we are, Lord Ivor Churchill.
He was busy that day
because this left-hand column seems
to relate to the pictures he bought.
Three that day, three drawings.
Here we have got "Femme Accroupie" -
Crouching Woman - that would seem to
describe exactly our drawing.
It's so reassuring to see the sale
of Steffi's sketch recorded in
the ledger and I'm keen to find
out where the Leicester Galleries
got the picture from.
Can you tell me anything about
the context of the sale?
Well, this was from the Durrio
Collection of Paul Gauguin
and here is the catalogue.
You've just mentioned a name
that I think refers to a label on
the back of our picture -
Durrio. Well, this is Durrio's
collection of Paul Gauguin.
He was a personal friend of his.
Christopher has managed to find
the original catalogue for the 1931
Gauguin exhibition at the
Leicester Galleries
and it contains a fascinating entry
for Crouching Woman.
Here it is. Number 46 -
Femme Accroupie.
Crouching Woman. "Study for the
picture - Nafea Faaipoipo."
Those few type-written words are
hugely significant.
They declare that Crouching Woman
is actually a preparatory work
for Nafea Faa Ipoipo,
the Tahitian title of the Paul
Gauguin oil painting better known as
When Will You Marry?, one of the
most expensive paintings ever sold.
This adds an extra layer of intrigue
to Steffi's sketch because art
historians have long speculated that
the subject of the picture could be
a young Tahitian girl
called Teha'amana,
who at just 13 became Gauguin's
companion
on his first visit to
the island in 1891.
This kind of sexual exploitation
between Westerners and the islanders
was, grimly, all too commonplace
at the time.
While Philip is making progress
with Steffi's sketch,
my concerns about James's oil
painting,
the still life, are mounting.
Although scientific tests confirmed
the pigments are consistent with
the late 19th-century work,
I'm keen to look deeper.
So I've arranged to meet Aviva
Burnstock, head of conservation
at the Courtauld Institute of Art in
London.
Hi, Aviva. Hello. Good to see you.
And you.
One of the strongest connections
between the picture and Paul Gauguin
is the painted inscription to the
artist's friend, "Au Seigner Roy".
But is it all it seems?
I think you can see quite clearly
here that the inscription paint is
on the very top surface.
You see how brushy it is?
It is painted right on the very
surface,
the final application of
brownish paint,
over the top of the final
composition -
so that is useful to see.
So what does that tell us? Does it
tell us that it was painted when
the picture was created,
so when the paint was wet?
Or after it had dried?
Looks like after it has dried, but
it was definitely the final touch.
I can't see any areas where it has
blended into the original paint,
it's just simply put on top.
But it's quite dilute.
Could the inscription have been put
on by someone other than the artist?
That's quite possible.
And it could be not long after it
was painted or many, many years
after it was painted. It could.
Under closer scrutiny,
Aviva can see that the inscription
was applied over cracks in
the underlying paint,
suggesting that the picture had time
to dry and crack before
the dedication to Seigner Roy was
applied.
So was the inscription merely added
by Paul Gauguin long after he had
finished the picture, perhaps as a
more personal touch for a gift?
Or might it have been added by
someone else
to make an unknown painting look
like a work by Gauguin?
To find out, I've asked handwriting
expert Adam Brand to compare the PG
signature on James's painting with
those on Gauguin's recognised works.
How do they compare?
So, Adam, as you know, we have got
some concerns about James's
painting -
Still Life With Oranges.
What are we seeing here, these are
all authentic Gauguins, are they?
Yes, yes.
They all look so different.
Yes, I mean, some of these Ps miss
the top,
they don't even look like P
structures.
Some have a rising point at
the middle of the G and then go
down relatively straight.
You have other Gs, they are just S
shapes, as you can see down here.
So there is tremendous variety in
the authenticated Paul Gauguin
initials.
So taking our particular PG
and comparing it to what we know is
an authenticated PG
on a Gauguin painting,
what have you been able to find out?
There is one thing that you look at,
which is always what is going on in
terms of the stroke.
And when you compare the stroke,
there is a noticeable difference.
This, on the left, is the P from
the question signature.
The actual structure
stops in the middle.
It has a sort of moustache
structure.
There is no attempt to swing around
and make that P formation.
And the fact that this is so jagged
around the outlines here,
does that suggest a tentativeness?
Yes, you're not getting the fluency.
You're getting the stops,
the break, the change in pressure.
You're getting, obviously,
changes in pressure here.
But the smoothness is much cleaner
on this particular letter.
And with a faker, you would expect
this signature to be more tentative,
wouldn't you, as opposed to sort
of dashing it off...
Absolutely. ..if you were the actual
person? Yes, absolutely.
OK. What else have you looked at?
Now, if we look at the G element of
Paul Gauguin,
again, there are quite noticable
differences
because, in the authenticated
Paul Gauguin,
you have this lift at the end,
coming down to a straight line,
not necessarily vertical,
but it has a lift,
a covering stroke and then that
straight quality.
With this question painting,
instead of lifting,
it goes straight in and it seems to
curve a bit more than
the known Paul Gauguin paintings -
and that is why I feel so strongly
that this is by a different person
to Paul Gauguin.
Even before today, we knew it had
problems.
And now we have Adam, who has looked
at the signature and he clearly
doesn't think the signature is
genuine.
That on its own is not conclusive
evidence.
But nonetheless, we are building
a picture here...
..of a painting that looks like
it is by
someone other than Paul Gauguin.
And I know James is going to be so
disappointed.
Doubts about the authenticity of
the still life are mounting up.
We've discovered that James's
painting first came to light
in 1923, in a sale at
a famous Parisian auction house,
Hotel Drouot.
The trouble is, only a handful of
Gauguin works from this sale can
still be traced and they are now
considered highly suspicious.
Anthea Callen, a world-renowned
expert
in late 19th-century French art,
has also been examining the painting
in detail.
And we've asked James to come to
the gallery for a crisis meeting.
Hello. Hi, James.
How are you doing?
Nice to see you. Hello.
Just to remind you where
we've got to.
We've had a handwriting analyst
look at it,
who had some doubts about whether or
not this signature was genuine,
and in particular revealed through
scientific analysis
that the signature would have been
put on this painting
after the painting was dry. Right.
One thing we did find out in the
course of researching this painting
and its provenance is we took it
back as far as 1923
and a sale of a number
of purported Gauguins there.
What's troubling is that almost all
of them have just disappeared
without trace
and the conclusion we have come to
is that many of those were dodgy.
And some, we have found,
two in particular, on the walls of
prestigious museums,
which we think
are almost certainly fake.
Gosh!
So when the analysis doesn't quite
add up as we would like it,
we then often fall upon
connoisseurship,
that's the eye of someone who has
experience and whom we trust -
and Anthea is here in this capacity.
Hi, Anthea. Hi, James.
Well, I found the bowl was really
quite convincing
because, although it's
an irregular-shaped bowl,
it shows Gauguin's interest in
Cezanne,
which I felt was potentially
very positive.
But there are other aspects of it
which are less convincing.
The brushwork is less than
characteristic.
I think there are weaknesses in
the drawing,
which suggest a hand much more
amateurish than that of Gauguin,
to be honest.
For example, the way that the
brushwork here
produces this kind of strange
wiggle.
The squiggle? It's almost
like a bit of writing, isn't it?
It is. I mean, there are aspects to
it like that,
and also the overall composition in
the foreground,
that are really quite weak.
So, Anthea, in your opinion,
is it or is it not by Gauguin?
I don't think it's a work by
Gauguin, no.
I'm very sorry.
Well, we've always known it's an
outside chance.
Yes, yes.
I think, to be honest, that it's
from the circle of Gauguin.
Of the period. Or, indeed,
maybe even a little bit later.
Although the full truth about
James's picture may never be known,
it's possible it was painted by one
of Gauguin's contemporaries,
perhaps as a copy of an original
work,
with the bogus inscription added
later.
We've been very, very realistic
about this all the way through.
But something we felt compelled to
pursue,
because you can't have something
like that ticking away,
thinking, "Why aren't we doing
anything about this?" Of course.
You just have to know.
We thought it could be
something tremendously important.
If it had been by Gauguin -
I don't know if I can bear to do
this to you, James -
if it had been by Gauguin, Philip,
tell us what it might have been
worth.
I mean, these are such cruel,
unthinkable thoughts, aren't they?
If this could be proved to be
by Gauguin,
we're talking hundreds of thousands,
possibly even low millions.
What's its value now, and what
should I worry about?
Well, I mean... Look, the value is
as a decorative picture.
But it's a decorative picture with
a bit of history.
Don't be too disappointed.
It's worth high hundreds,
on a good day, low thousands.
Right, OK. Yeah, it's a massive
difference, isn't it?
Enjoy it. Exactly.
Enjoy it as a part of your
family story,
coming from your mother and from
Dick Rykens,
who was a family friend.
And we've had a heck of a ride
with it.
No, good. Well, thank you very much
indeed.
I've thoroughly enjoyed the whole
process.
Good for you.
Well, this is an unhappy first for
Fake Or Fortune?,
to have fallen before we get to
the final hurdle,
before we submit the painting to
the recognised world authority,
in this case the Wildenstein
Institute.
But it's pretty clear from all the
work we've done on James's painting
and from what Anthea had to say,
that there is almost no chance,
I think,
that they would accept it as
a genuine work.
I genuinely feel very sad for James.
But in the end you've got to fight
the battles that you can win,
and I have been there many times
myself.
And even though initially a lot of
the evidence seemed to stack up,
gradually, as we looked at it more,
it fell apart.
With James's painting out of
the running,
we are determined to redouble our
efforts
to prove that Steffi's sketch is
a genuine work by Paul Gauguin.
I'm taking up the quest to find
further information
about the provenance.
We know from labels on the back that
it was exhibited in Switzerland in
1928, when it was listed as being
in the ownership of F Durrio,
said to be a close friend of
Paul Gauguin.
Francisco Durrio, better known
as Paco,
grew up in Bilbao in northern Spain
and became a respected artist
with a flair for ceramics and
jewellery.
I've come to the city's Museum of
Fine Arts, which holds an impressive
collection of his work,
and I've arranged to meet Dr Javier
Gonzalez De Durana
to find out more about Durrio's
relationship with Paul Gauguin.
Xavier, how well did Durrio know
Gauguin? Were they close?
They shared a studio room in Paris
for many months before Gauguin
went to Tahiti for the second trip.
And was Durrio a great admirer of
Gauguin?
Yes. Gauguin was God to him.
Yeah. That's why...as a proof of
the friendship between them,
that is why Gauguin give as a gift
an incredible amount of pieces that
Durrio has.
How many artworks did Gauguin give
to Durrio at that time?
I think 120.
Durrio never bought a single work
by Gauguin, he had no money.
In 1893,
Gauguin returned to France after his
first visit to Tahiti and resumed
work in his Paris studio.
By the summer of 1895, though,
he was preparing to return
to his tropical paradise and
Javier's research
reveals that it was at this point
that he presented Durrio with
the sketchbooks from his first trip,
perhaps considering them of little
value.
In the years after Gauguin's death,
though,
museums and collectors began to
realise their true worth.
On the back of our sketch here,
there is a label that has the name
"F Durrio, Paris. 1928."
And it appears that it was at
an exhibition in Basel.
In Basel, OK. And I just wondered if
you could shed any light on that.
Yes, we have a catalogue of that
temporary exhibition in Basel.
And if we check the list of
pieces...
"Kauernde Frau", which means
Crouching Woman.
This is the drawing you have in
your hand.
As provenance trails go,
this one is compelling.
Gauguin gave the sketchbooks to
Paco Durrio,
who in turn lent them to a museum
in Switzerland.
But why did Durrio end up parting
with such a precious gift?
The answer may lie in the fact that
Durrio was given 100,000 francs by
the museum as a security deposit
for his sketches,
to be returned when the exhibition
was over.
The problem was, Durrio spent
the money,
so the museum kept the sketches.
Durrio was so poor,
he had so many basic needs,
that he spent all the money!
Oh, so Durrio never sold any of
Gauguin's works
but because he had spent this
guarantee from the art exhibition
in Basel, of 100,000 francs,
he lost them, effectively.
He lost the lot.
Those pieces,
exactly the same ones,
were sold in Leicester Galleries to
pay part of the money
lent, given to Durrio.
How fascinating!
So that is a direct link between
that label and this label.
It's a close link.
Yeah, this happens because of this.
Because of this.
Although the provenance for Steffi's
sketch seems very promising,
there is still a crucial question
to answer.
How could the Crouching Woman appear
in a full page of sketches in a book
about Gauguin, published in 1958,
yet seem to have been cut out of
the same page earlier in the 1940s,
when Dr Alfred Scharf bought it?
Anthea Callan thinks she's cracked
this riddle,
so we are
joining forces back at the gallery.
I found something really
interesting.
You remember in relation to what the
auction house said about our sketch?
Yes, indeed. They thought it was a
fake or a copy.
But what I found is,
in an archive in Paris,
the original glass plate photograph,
which appeared in the book,
and here it is.
It's from the archive of
Eugene Droullet in Paris,
one of the great art
photographers.
He died in 1916, so it must date
from before 1916.
This is the crucial piece of
evidence we need.
The photo of the full page from
Gauguin's sketch book that features
Crouching Woman wasn't taken in 1958
as the auction house seemed to
believe,
it was taken at least
42 years earlier,
meaning it could have been cut down
to a much smaller size long before
Steffi's grandfather bought it in
the 1940s.
That's transformative!
That's what we were looking for.
That puts Steffi's grandfather off
the hook.
And that means that the picture
could have been cut down anywhere,
then, between 1916, when this
photographer died, and 1948,
when Steffi's grandfather bought it.
I mean, that completely changes
everything.
So, to nail this,
we now need to be absolutely sure
that this drawing is one and
the same as
that that appears in the book
and I think I have a way of doing
that.
I want to find out whether Steffi's
sketch precisely matches
the photo of the original sketchbook
page in the 1958 book,
so Fiona and I have arranged to
visit a studio in Mayfair that
specialises in art photography.
Antony Makinson has taken a photo
of Steffi's sketch and used imaging
software
in an attempt to match it exactly
with the original photograph.
So this is Steffi's drawing.
Anthony, have you managed to match
it up to the photograph in the book?
Yeah, the image in the book is
really, really clear
and very good quality.
It's the moment of truth.
Will the image of Steffi's sketch
exactly match
the photo taken before 1916?
Look at that!
It's like it's coming into focus.
It matches perfectly.
It does! And look, the lines here
like this marvellous pair of
buttocks here, comes right in.
So a perfect alignment.
This arm...
Subtle parts of it are all there...
..like this little nick coming off
this line here.
That's exactly the same,
look at that!
I mean, no-one would even think of
copying that.
It's so tiny.
What about this here, this tear?
The tear is coming down from here,
onto the paper.
Not as visible in the book image,
but it does line up exactly.
That's fantastic! I mean, that's an
absolute dead ringer, isn't it?
I mean, this is a fingerprint.
I mean, it looks as though it's just
dropped out of the middle
of that drawing. There's no way
these are not one and the same.
And given we know that this is
a drawing, frankly,
it's impossible to conceive of
even the most sophisticated forger
or artist replicating this with
such exactitude.
We've almost removed any doubts
about Steffi's sketch,
but there's one final reservation we
need to lay to rest.
The fact that it appears to have
been cut down in size has always
raised suspicion and I'm keen to
find out
if any other genuine Gauguin works
have been tampered with in this way.
Steffi and I have come to Paris to
visit the Musee Du Quai Branly,
the city's museum of indigenous art,
which also houses a small collection
of works by Gauguin,
including pages from his
Tahiti sketchbooks.
So, Steph, I wanted you to
particularly see these two drawings.
They are by Gauguin,
they are 100% authentic.
Oh, wow.
But all of these share something in
common.
They are sketches done, I think,
from life.
These are little bits of information
that he could then use later on
to work into his pictures.
But I want you to have a look
at this one in particular.
Notice how the figure is placed
on the page.
Do you see how a bit of her elbow is
missing?
Yeah, it looks like it's being
trimmed down that side, doesn't it?
And this one here is also just
unusually tight,
unusually small for a sketchbook.
Yeah, it's almost too much in
the corner.
The forensic art historical side of
this, I think,
is extraordinarily important because
we are finding examples of other
drawings that are unquestionably by
Gauguin that have been trimmed,
that have been cut,
but the really important aspect of
these drawings in relation to yours
is who owned them,
the only person apart from Gauguin,
the artist, who owned them,
from whom this museum in 1936
acquired them.
In this state.
In this state. These two drawings
were owned by the same person...
..who owned yours. Right, OK.
It's Paco Durrio.
That's brilliant. That's exciting.
Great. I love it.
The story of Steffi's sketch appears
to be complete.
On his first visit to Tahiti,
Paul Gauguin picked up his
sketchbook and drew a likeness of
one of the native girls that had
captured his imagination.
He gave the sketchbook to
his friend, Paco Durrio,
who lent it to a museum, only to
forfeit it to pay off a debt.
It was exhibited and offered for
sale in London,
where it was purchased by
Lord Ivor Churchill.
And finally, in the late 1940s, it
was bought by Dr Alfred Scharf,
Steffi's grandfather.
It should be an open and shut case.
Behind these metal doors, Steffi,
is the Wildenstein Institute,
a bastion of the French art world.
They have the power to say
yes or no on all Gauguins.
I'm convinced your drawing is right
but I don't know what they're going
to say.
We're only going to get
one chance at this.
If they say no, I'm afraid this
drawing is in serious trouble.
I trust what you're saying
and I think we've got the best
chance we've ever had, so I'm...
I want to take the risk.
I want to know.
As the committee who rule on Gauguin
works are not due to meet until
the autumn, they've agreed,
especially for us,
to review a dossier of evidence
about Steffi's sketch and give
their expert opinion.
Back in London, we're all gathering
to hear their verdict.
It's really worth considering
what's at stake here.
Steffi inherits a drawing by one of
the great late 19th,
early 20th-century artists,
or so she thinks,
only then to be told that it's
a fake, thus pretty well worthless.
Now, at that point, she could've
done anything -
sold it for nothing,
given it away -
a bit like one of those lottery
tickets that might be
a winner, but you're told it's the
wrong numbers
so you just discard it.
It was so disappointing about
James's painting
and everything now rests on
Steffi's sketch.
If it is genuine, it's likely to be
one of the very first sketches that
Gauguin did for his masterpiece
When Will You Marry?,
one of the most expensive paintings
ever sold.
But I've been disappointed before.
So here we are, Steffi.
This is the day. Are you feeling
a little bit nervous?
I am, yes, to be honest.
I'm not surprised.
Well, Steffi, if this can be proved
to be a genuine work by Gauguin,
for such an important picture,
we could be talking 200,000,
possibly in excess of that.
There is clearly an awful lot
riding on this.
The Wildenstein Institute made a
special case for you
and have sent us a letter,
which you've got.
A letter which I hold in my hand.
Right, go on. Are you ready?
Yeah.
Well, it starts, "The next committee
is still foreseen in the fall,
"the precise date is still
unknown" -
so that's the official committee
meeting.
"Of course, by then,
"the Gauguin committee will gladly
make a statement as to the inclusion
"of this drawing in the catalogue."
Really? That's it.
That's it. That is it.
Oh, thank you!
Wow.
And they go on to say, "On the basis
of this documentation, and of its
"manner, we have never dreamt of
putting it in doubt for a second."
Oh, lovely. What a fabulous outcome.
It is, it's thrilling.
It was also about my grandfather.
I really respected who he was and
his judgment,
and that was so called into
question,
and it's so lovely to know that he
was right all along.
This totally vindicates his eye.
Wow. That's really something,
isn't it?
So now that we know that this is
a study
for one of his most famous
pictures... Oh, yeah!
..and something that a lot of people
across the world will be very
interested to see and possibly own,
what are your plans for it?
I think I will sell it if I can
and, you know, I'll do some good
with it.
I'm thrilled for Steffi
and she's such a lovely person.
And to think that, just a few years
ago, that was turned down.
And it's a reminder, isn't it,
of the challenges and the risks
within the art world
and how sometimes so easily the real
thing can get written off?
If you think you have an
undiscovered painting
or other precious object,
contact us at...